feat: escort policy (#2)
open-autonomy/escort: diagram/EscortActivation.md

# Escort Activation

> When an escort is created, the FMS initiates the activation process by sending `ActivateEscortRequestV1` messages to the AHS for each of the AV defined in the Fleet Definition. The AHS then communicates with each of the AVs to activate the escort internally. This document includes the full life cycle: activation attempts, steady‑state position pulsing, and deactivation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an escort is created, the FMS initiates the activation process by sending [ActivateEscortRequestV1`](specification/V1/ActivateEscortRequestV1.md) messages to the AHS for each of the AV defined in the [Fleet Definition](specification/V1/FleetDefinitionV2.md). The AHS then communicates with each of the AVs to activate the escort internally. This document includes the full life cycle: activation attempts, steady‑state position pulsing, and deactivation.
```

# Escort Activation

> When an escort is created, the FMS initiates the activation process by sending `ActivateEscortRequestV1` messages to the AHS for each of the AV defined in the Fleet Definition. The AHS then communicates with each of the AVs to activate the escort internally. This document now also includes the full life cycle: activation attempts, steady‑state position pulsing, and deactivation.

Reviewer 2: remove "now also"

Reviewer 3: Updated

> [!IMPORTANT]
> All systems shall implement idempotency when managing Escort Activations.

## Escort Overview Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    actor Escorter
    participant FMS
    participant AHS
    participant AV

    Escorter->>FMS: Activate Escort (UI Action)
    activate FMS
    activate AHS
    activate AV
    FMS->>AHS: ActivateEscortRequestV1

>     AHS->>AV: Activate

Reviewer 2: ActivateEscortCommand to be consistent with other diagrams

Reviewer 3: Updated

    AV->>AV: Protection zone pending

>     AV-->>AHS: Pending

Reviewer 2: ActivationStatus(pending) to be consistent with other diagrams

Reviewer 3: Updated

    AHS-->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Pending)

    AV->>AV: Enable protection zone

>     AV-->>AHS: Activated

Reviewer 2: ActivationStatus(activated) to be consistent with other diagrams

Reviewer 3: Updated

    AHS-->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Activated)
    FMS-->>FMS: All AVs Activated
    FMS-->>Escorter: Escort activated
    Note over FMS: DO NOT wait for response<br/>to start sending EscortPosition
    loop Escort loop (1 Hz)
        Escorter-->>FMS: (Position Source)
        FMS-->>AHS: EscortPosition
        AHS->>AV: PositionUpdate
        AV->>AV: Update zone geometry
        AV-->>AHS: Updated
    end
    %% Deactivation flow moved to EscortDeactivation.md
    deactivate AV
    deactivate AHS
    deactivate FMS
```

> [!TIP]

> > FMS must begin streaming position updates immediately after sending the activation request; waiting for an Accepted / Activated response can reduce safety margins.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE] 
FMS should begin streaming position updates immediately after sending the activation request, since the position information is required for AVs to activate the escort.
```

## Typical Escort Activation

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant FMS
    participant AHS
    participant AV 1
    participant AV N

    Note over FMS,AV N: On Connect Sequence
    User->>FMS: Create Escort
    FMS-->>FMS: Escort Pending
    FMS-->+User: Pending
    par AV 1
    FMS->>AHS: ActivateEscortRequestV1
    AHS->>AV 1: ActivateEscortCommand
    AV 1->>AHS: ActivationStatus(accepted)
    AHS->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Accepted)
        AV 1->>AV 1: Adheres to request
    AV 1->>AHS: ActivationStatus(activated)
    AHS->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Activated)
    and AV N
    FMS->>AHS: ActivateEscortRequestV1
    AHS->>AV N: ActivateEscortCommand
    AV N->>AHS: ActivationStatus(accepted)
    AHS->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Accepted)
        Note Over AV N: Unable to immediately adhere to request
        AV N->>AV N: Adheres to request
    AV N->>AHS: ActivationStatus(activated)
    AHS->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Activated)
    end

    User-->-FMS: Pending
    Note Over FMS: All AVs activated Escort
    FMS-->>FMS: Escort Activated
    FMS-->>User: Escort Activated
```

> [!TIP]

> > The 2-step activation confirmation helps the system avoid unnecessary retries and allows for better transparency to be provided to the user. Accept allows the AV to respond to the request immediately, even if it cannot adhere to the request immediately. Activate is used to confirm when the request is being adhered to.

Reviewer 4: I think we agreed to remove the "Accept" status being sent to FMS, this should be updated here.

## Escort Activation Rejection
When an AV cannot adhere to the request defined in the escort definition, the AHS should send a `"Rejected"` status in the `ActivateEscortResponse` message to FMS. The FMS will then notify the user accordingly.

> [!NOTE]

> > If an AV rejects a given escort, it will never activate it. The escort will not be activated within the FMS and will remain as `"pending"` until it has been de-activated. 

Reviewer 2: What’s the point of keeping it as pending? It kind of implies that it could be activated by mistake in the future. Wouldn't it be better to leave it up to the FMS to try to activate it again based on other input?

Reviewer 3: Removed confusing sentence.

# Escort Activation
When an escort is created, the Fleet Management System (FMS) initiates the activation process by sending `ActivateEscortRequestV1` messages to the Autonomous Haulage System (AHS) for each of the Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) defined in the Fleet Definition. The AHS then communicates with each of the AVs to activate the escort internally. This document now also includes the full life cycle: activation attempts, steady‑state position pulsing, and deactivation.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> All systems shall implement idempotency when managing Escort Activations.

## Escort Overview Flow

> [!NOTE]
> This sequence diagram combines: initial activation, repeated Pending responses while the AV cannot yet satisfy constraints, transition to Activated, continuous position pulsing at 1 Hz, and final deactivation.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    actor Escorter
    participant FMS
    participant AHS
    participant AV

    Escorter->>FMS: Activate Escort (UI Action)
    activate FMS
    activate AHS
    activate AV
    FMS->>AHS: ActivateEscortRequestV1
    AHS->>AV: Activate

>     AV->>AV: Prepare / Add Escort

Reviewer 2: This can be removed since its internal work in the service, and does not add anything to the diagram

    loop Escort loop (1 Hz)
        Escorter-->>FMS: (Position Source)
        FMS-->>AHS: EscortPosition
        AHS->>AV: PositionUpdate
        AV->>AV: Update zone geometry
        AV-->>AHS: Updated
    end
    %% Deactivation flow moved to EscortDeactivation.md
    deactivate AV
    deactivate AHS
    deactivate FMS
```

> [!TIP]
> FMS must begin streaming position updates immediately after sending the activation request; waiting for an Accepted / Activated response can reduce safety margins.

## Typical Escort Activation

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant FMS
    participant AHS
    participant AV 1
    participant AV N

    Note over FMS,AV N: On Connect Sequence
    User->>FMS: Create Escort
    FMS-->>FMS: Escort Pending
    FMS-->+User: Pending
    par AV 1
    FMS->>AHS: ActivateEscortRequestV1
    AHS->>AV 1: ActivateEscortCommand
    AV 1->>AHS: ActivationStatus(accepted)
    AHS->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Accepted)
        AV 1->>AV 1: Adheres to request
    AV 1->>AHS: ActivationStatus(activated)
    AHS->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Activated)

>     and AV N

Reviewer 2: Change text on "work ongoing arrrows" to have that same text on all diagrams, maybe the ones in the first diagram are most clear.

Protection zone pending
Protection zone activated

>     and AV N

Reviewer 2: I do not believe we should use the word policy at all in this document, since it will be confused with policy zones policy

# Escort Activation

> When an escort is created, the Fleet Management System (FMS) initiates the activation process by sending `ActivateEscortRequestV1` messages to the Autonomous Haulage System (AHS) for each of the Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) defined in the Fleet Definition. The AHS then communicates with each of the AVs (via on‑board components such as Scrobat / ADS) to activate the escort internally. This document now also includes the full life cycle: activation attempts (including a pending loop while the vehicle cannot yet respect the escort protection zone), steady‑state position pulsing, and deactivation.

Reviewer 2: No need to mention internal Scania implementations in the public repo: (via on‑board components such as Scrobat / ADS)

> When an escort is created, the Fleet Management System (FMS) initiates the activation process by sending `ActivateEscortRequestV1` messages to the Autonomous Haulage System (AHS) for each of the Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) defined in the Fleet Definition. The AHS then communicates with each of the AVs (via on‑board components such as Scrobat / ADS) to activate the escort internally. This document now also includes the full life cycle: activation attempts (including a pending loop while the vehicle cannot yet respect the escort protection zone), steady‑state position pulsing, and deactivation.

Reviewer 2: No need to calrify this, there is no pending messages between FMS and AHS only AV internal: (including a pending loop while the vehicle cannot yet respect the escort protection zone)

> [!IMPORTANT]
> All systems shall implement idempotency when managing Escort Activations.

> ## Updated Activation / Operation / Deactivation Flow (Mermaid)

Reviewer 2: No need to specify that its a mermaid diagram, maybe just call it Escort Overview Flow or something similar

> [!NOTE]

> > This Mermaid sequence combines: initial activation, repeated Pending responses while the AV cannot yet satisfy constraints, transition to Activated, continuous position pulsing at 1 Hz, and final deactivation.

Reviewer 2: No need to specify that its a mermaid diagram

Author: Do you think this text is needed at all, or do you think the diagram is self explanatory?

Reviewer 2: no, its not needed

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    actor Escorter
    participant FMS
    participant AHS
    participant AV

    Escorter->>FMS: Activate Escort (UI Action)
    activate FMS
    activate AHS
    activate AV
    FMS->>AHS: ActivateEscortRequestV1
    AHS->>AV: Activate
    AV->>AV: Prepare / Add Escort

>     loop AV cannot yet respect zone

Reviewer 2: Is the loop box needed ? There is no communication between FMS and AHS during this time, its only the AV that needs to make the decision. And "First time activation" could probably be removed also since that is clear if there is no loop box.

        AV->>AV: Protection zone pending
        AV-->>AHS: Accepted
        alt First time activation
            AHS-->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Accepted)
        end
    end
    AV->>AV: Enable protection zone
    AV-->>AHS: Activated
    AHS-->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Activated)
    FMS-->>FMS: All AVs Activated
    FMS-->>Escorter: Escort activated
    Note over FMS: DO NOT wait for response<br/>to start sending EscortPosition
    loop Escort loop (1 Hz)
        Escorter-->>FMS: (Position Source)
        FMS-->>AHS: EscortPosition
        AHS->>AV: PositionUpdate
        AV->>AV: Update zone geometry

>         AV-->>AHS: Activated

Reviewer 2: Not sure what Activated means in this case since its already supposed to be activated, do we need to be able to have some kind of Exception messaging sent to FMS if geometry update fails ?

Author: As I understood it the ADS sends an activated when the new zone is applied. But that information isn't really needed for this diagram. I changed it to updated

    end
    %% Deactivation flow moved to EscortDeactivation.md
    deactivate AV
    deactivate AHS
    deactivate FMS
```

> [!TIP]
> FMS must begin streaming position updates immediately after sending the activation request; waiting for an Accepted / Activated response can reduce safety margins.

> ## Typical Escort Activation (Legacy Mermaid Diagram)

Reviewer 2: Remove "(Legacy Mermaid Diagram)"

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant FMS
    participant AHS
    participant AV 1
    participant AV N

    Note over FMS,AV N: On Connect Sequence
    User->>FMS: Create Escort
    FMS-->>FMS: Escort Pending
    FMS-->+User: Pending
    par AV 1
    FMS->>AHS: ActivateEscortRequestV1
    AHS->>AV 1: ActivateEscortCommand
    AV 1->>AHS: ActivationStatus(accepted)
    AHS->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Accepted)
        AV 1->>AV 1: Adheres to Policy
    AV 1->>AHS: ActivationStatus(activated)
    AHS->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Activated)
    and AV N
    FMS->>AHS: ActivateEscortRequestV1
    AHS->>AV N: ActivateEscortCommand
    AV N->>AHS: ActivationStatus(accepted)
    AHS->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Accepted)
        Note Over AV N: Unable to immediately adhere to policy
        AV N->>AV N: Adheres to Policy
    AV N->>AHS: ActivationStatus(activated)
    AHS->>FMS: ActivateEscortResponseV1(status=Activated)
    end

    User-->-FMS: Pending
    Note Over FMS: All AVs activated Escort
    FMS-->>FMS: Escort Activated
    FMS-->>User: Escort Activated
```

> [!TIP]

> > The 2-step activation confirmation helps the system avoid unnecessary retries and allows for better transparency to be provided to the user. Accept allows the AV to respond to the request immediately, even if it cannot adhere to the policy immediately. Activate is used to confirm when the policy is being adhered to.

Reviewer 2: Is the word 'policy' correct in terms of escort or should it say 'request' as in 'escort request' ?
